In this video Let us learn Exponential and Factorial
time complexities. First let us take this recursive
algorithm which has two recursive calls. To analyse the time
complexity of recursive algorithms
we have four methods
First one is iteration method and the second one is
Recursion tree method and the third one is substitution
method and the fourth one is Master's theorem.
Here, we are going to use the recursion
tree method to solve this. We will learn all
other methods elaborately in the further chapters. So let us draw the
recursion tree for this algorithm
First take the function fun(n).
From fun(n) two recursive calls will be
executed so write fun(n-1) and
fun(n-1) and then from
a fun(n-1) two recursive calls
will be executed fun(n-2)
and fun(n-2) similarly for
this side also. So total four function calls will be
executed at this level and in the next level, eight
function calls will be executed and it will grow like
this and at K th level there will be 2 power k
time function calls and let us assume at the
K th level
The recursive call reaches the function fun
of 0 and thus
The recursive calls will stop.
Let's calculate the total time complexity of this Recursive
tree
Here first level
We have one recursive calls and in the second level
we have 2 recursive calls
And in third level we have 4 recursive calls and
in fourth level we have 8 recursive calls
And So, In general we can say in i th level
there will be 2 power i
function calls executed so the total time complexity
T(n) will be the sum of all power of 2s
till
2 Power K
That is T(n) equal to 1 + 2 raise to 1
+ 2 raise to 2 + 2  raise to 3
+ etcetera upto 2 raise to k
We already know sum of all power of 2s till
2 raise to k is (2 raise to k+1)-1
So T(n) equal to (2 raise to k+1)-1
for better understanding, Let us
quickly verify the above formula
First, let us find sum of all power of 2
numbers till 2 raise to 3
It is 1+2+4+8 which
is equal to 15
Let us calculate the same using formula 2 raise to K+1
Here, k=3
So (2 raise to 3+1) - 1
That is (2 raise to 4)-1 which is
16 - 1 and we get 15
So we get the same result. From this, we can
clearly understand that sum of all power of 2s till
2 raise to K is equal to value of its
next power of two number - 1
That is (2 raise to K+1) - 1
Hence the T(n) equal to (2 raise to K+1)-1
(2 raise to K+1)-1
We already assumed that at k th level the recursive calls reaches
a fun of zero
This means at K th  level the value of
n-K will be zero. Since n-k equal to 0
K will be equal to n if we apply
and n instead of K we will get T(n)
equal to (2 raise to n+1)-1
which is the big O of 2 raise to n
time complexity
So the time complexity of this algorithm ia order of
2 raise to n. If the time complexity of an
algorithm is 2 power n and we can say
it is an exponential time algorithm.